---
layout: post
title: "文言文版奥巴马获胜演讲"
date: '2014-01-08T12:49:00.001+08:00'
author: Wenh Q
tags:
modified_time: '2014-01-08T12:49:54.173+08:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-4961947611491238191.post-7154383046694759095
blogger_orig_url: http://binaryware.blogspot.com/2014/01/blog-post_1404.html
---
[文言文版奥巴马获胜演讲](http://kisshi.com/2010/01/28/wen-yan-wen-obama/)  于
10-1-27 通过 [河蟹娱乐](http://kisshi.com/) 作者：胡戈戈

感谢河蟹网友[风吟](http://fengyin.name/)的分享

Hello，Chicago！
 芝城父老，别来无恙，

If there is anyone outthere who still doubts that America is a place
where all things arepossible， who still wonders if the dream of our
founders is alive inour time， who still questions the power of our
democracy， tonight isyour answer.

余尝闻世人有疑，不知当今美利坚凡事皆可成就耶？开国先贤之志方岿然于世耶？民主之伟力不减于昔年耶？凡存诸疑者，今夕当可释然。

It's the answer told by lines that stretched around schools andchurches
in numbers this nation has never seen， by people who waitedthree hours
and four hours， many for the first time in their lives，because they
believed that this time must be different， that theirvoices could be
that difference.

今夕之释然，皆蒙美利坚民众之协力——学塾祠庙之外，市井乡野之间，万千父老心焦似焚，苦待竟日，愿献一票之力。其中，平生未尝涉国事者，数亦不少，而今有此义举，皆因一念不衰——今夫天下，非同既往，愿发吁天之声，必成动地之势。

It's the answer spoken by young and old， rich and poor， Democrat
andRepublican， black， white， Hispanic， Asian， Native American，
gay，straight， disabled and not disabled. Americans who sent a message
tothe world that we have never been just a collection of individuals or
acollection of red states and blue states. We are， and always will
be，the United States of America.

今夕之释然，皆仰吾国同胞之齐心——何谈贫富老幼之差、党社宗族之异，惶论发肤肌体之别、志趣爱恶之分。吾国既以"合众"为名，吾辈则更无疏离之意，红蓝二党并肩而立，数十邦州挽手相合，无分你我，共称一家，昂然于世，齐声一呼，天下乃有此释然。

It's the answer that led those who've been told for so long by so manyto
be cynical and fearful and doubtful about what we can achieve to
puttheir hands on the arc of history and bend it once more toward the
hopeof a better day.

今夕之释然，皆因愤懑者之镇静，忧惧者之勇气，犹疑者之笃定——平素世间种种，消磨其志向，溃灭其梦想，而值此风云之际，除旧更新，当仁不让，倾力而动乾坤者，更何人哉！

It's been a long time coming， but tonight， because of what we did
onthis date in this election at this defining moment change has come
toAmerica.

俟之诚久，其志弥坚。幸天地明察，乃有今日，乃有此刻，乃有此一选举，乃有我亿万美利坚大好国民——吾邦之大变革，方得自兹而始也！

A little bit earlier this evening， I received an extraordinarily
gracious call from Sen. McCain.
Sen. McCain fought long and hard in this campaign. And he's fought
evenlonger and harder for the country that he loves. He has
enduredsacrifices for America that most of us cannot begin to imagine.
We arebetter off for the service rendered by this brave and selfless
leader.I congratulate him； I congratulate Gov. Palin for all that
they'veachieved. And I look forward to working with them to renew
thisnation's promise in the months ahead.

顷接参议员麦君凯恩电，虽未得晤，幸有一谈，其言谆谆，其意诚诚，鄙人感佩之至。选战期内，麦君劳碌几重，奔波几许，皆为国家计。诸般求索，时日良多，皆非余所能及。于国于民之惊人牺牲，亦非庸庸如吾辈者所可想见。以麦君之胆魄襟怀，能为吾邦所用，实国家之幸，万民之幸也。前途漫漫，其事未竟，余所盼瞩由衷者，唯共麦凯恩君、佩林君，及诸贤士比肩，会吾等之绵力，成吾邦之大业。

I want to thank mypartner in this journey， a man who campaigned from
his heart， and spokefor the men and women he grew up with on the
streets of Scranton androde with on the train home to Delaware， the
vice president-elect ofthe United States， Joe Biden.

乔君拜登，亦吾所感铭至深者也。竞选之业，艰险不足与外人道，幸有乔君之辅佐，其诚天可鉴之。乔君其人，素言恳辞切，意笃情真，盖尝经斯兰克顿街乡邻之提命，饱聆特拉华州父老之晤教也。他日余既登总统之位，乔君必当副之。

And I would not be standing here tonight without the unyielding
supportof my best friend for the last 16 years the rock of our family，
thelove of my life， the nation's next first lady Michelle Obama.

拙荆米氏，追随鄙人凡一十六年，既为爱侣，更为挚友，既为吾阖家之基石，又乃余终生之至爱。鄙人尝自忖度，倘无贤妻若此，今朝阔论高谈于此处者，不知何人矣！

Sashaand Malia I love you both more than you can imagine. And you
haveearned the new puppy that's coming with us to the new White House.
小女萨沙、玛丽，余素深喜之。昔日为父尝与汝等言，此番选战若得一胜，愿购小犬一头相赠，待阖家乔迁总统府邸之日，偕汝等同进吾宅。今当胜负已出，既有一诺在前，必自践行不欺也。

 And while she's no longer with us， I know my grandmother's
watching，along with the family that made me who I am. I miss them
tonight. Iknow that my debt to them is beyond measure.
祖母大人虽已仙逝，料必有灵在天，俯察人寰，想应颔首开颜矣。吾奥巴马氏列祖列宗，亦当如是。今日今时，此情此景，鄙人追思之心，乌鸟之情，曷其有极！唯生死陌路，仙凡有别，虽怀反哺之心，而无答报之门也！

 To my sister Maya， my sister Alma， all my other brothers and
sisters，thank you so much for all the support that you've given me. I
amgrateful to them.
至若玛雅、艾玛二姐妹，以及吾家诸同胞，所惠我者，亦属良多，久沐恩德，此当拜谢。

And to my campaign manager， David Plouffe， the unsung hero of
thiscampaign， who built the best — the best political campaign， I
think， inthe history of the United States of America.To my chief
strategistDavid Axelrod who's been a partner with me every step of the
way.To thebest campaign team ever assembled in the history of politics
you madethis happen， and I am forever grateful for what you've
sacrificed toget it done.

大卫？普劳夫君，大卫？阿克塞罗德君，一为鄙人竞选事务之经理，一为鄙人国事韬略之智囊。余尝自喟叹，左右谋士，余所仰赖者，皆亘古未见之贤才。普阿二君，则更此中之翘楚。区区不才，有何德能，可得膀臂若此？当此功成之际，感荷之心，亦自拳拳。

But above all， I will never forget who this victory truly belongs to.
It belongs to you. It belongs to you.

至于鄙人铭之肺腑，须臾不敢忘怀者，则诸位也。盖今日鄙人之胜绩，实诸位之胜绩，鄙人之荣光，实诸位之荣光！

I was never the likeliest candidate for this office. We didn't startwith
much money or many endorsements. Our campaign was not hatched inthe
halls of Washington. It began in the backyards of Des Moines andthe
living rooms of Concord and the front porches of Charleston. It wasbuilt
by working men and women who dug into what little savings theyhad to
give $5 and $10 and $20 to the cause.

余素朴陋，虽有参选之心，并无必胜之志。谋事之初，银资乏匮，从者寥寥；起事之地，皆蔽寓荒斋，不在高阁；成事之基，无非寻常百姓，涓滴之献。

It grew strength from the young people who rejected the myth of
theirgeneration's apathy who left their homes and their families for
jobsthat offered little pay and less sleep.
 It drew strength fromthe not-so-young people who braved the bitter cold
and scorching heatto knock on doors of perfect strangers， and from the
millions ofAmericans who volunteered and organized and proved that more
than twocenturies later a government of the people， by the people， and
for thepeople has not perished from the Earth.

今日之胜，有赖一众热血青年，抛其家，别其室，不辞其苦，不计其酬，矻矻于此——"国中青年爱国之心已泯"之谬论，今可休矣！今日之胜，有赖壮志未已之诸前辈，无惧寒暑，行走奔波，劝说民众。今日之胜，乃数百万美利坚民众之胜，察其意，皆属踊跃为国，观其行，处处谨严有序，足堪告慰二百年前开国之先贤——民有、民治、民享之政体，未尝动摇也！

This is your victory.
嗟夫！此实诸位之功也！

AndI know you didn't do this just to win an election. And I know
youdidn't do it for me.You did it because you understand the enormity
ofthe task that lies ahead. For even as we celebrate tonight， we know
thechallenges that tomorrow will bring are the greatest of our lifetime
—two wars， a planet in peril， the worst financial crisis in a
century.

余知诸君之意非在此一选举，亦非在鄙人一身。盖瞻前路之艰辛，益知此任非同小可也。虽今夕欢贺于此，而明朝酒醒，大患仍自当前，不容有怠——两地烽烟熊熊而起，四海之内纷纷而乱，金融业界惶惶而不得宁。

Even as we stand here tonight， we know there are brave Americans
wakingup in the deserts of Iraq and the mountains of Afghanistan to
risktheir lives for us.There are mothers and fathers who will lie
awakeafter the children fall asleep and wonder how they'll make the
mortgageor pay their doctors' bills or save enough for their child's
collegeeducation. There's new energy to harness， new jobs to be
created， newschools to build， and threats to meet， alliances to
repair.

是夜，饮宴笙歌之声不绝于耳，而异邦大漠群山中，吾国大好青年，兀自苦戍边塞，惝恍竟夜，性命尚未得安。吾国千万庶民，为人父母者，兀自惴惴难眠，所忧者，乃房宅所贷、病患之费、抚育之资也。至若吾国能源之耗，百业之兴，庠序之教，攻伐之术，怀远之道，亦皆吾等忡忡挂怀者也。

The road ahead will be long. Our climb will be steep. We may not
getthere in one year or even in one term. But， America， I have never
beenmore hopeful than I am tonight that we will get there. I promise
you，we as a people will get there.

渺渺乎其远，如不可达，危危乎其高，若不可攀。朝夕岁月，焉得成就？余不揣愚钝，愿以四载韶华，付诸此业，胜算何如虽不可知，然昂扬必胜之奇志，成就伟业之壮怀，平生未之有也。君子一诺，其重何如，此地今夕，愿斗胆发一狂言——吾辈既在，其事必成！

There will be setbacks and false starts. There are many who won't
agreewith every decision or policy I make as president. And we know
thegovernment can't solve every problem. But I will always be honest
withyou about the challenges we face. I will listen to you， especially
whenwe disagree. And， above all， I will ask you to join in the work
ofremaking this nation， the only way it's been done in America for
221years — block by block， brick by brick， calloused hand by
callousedhand.

逶迤坎坷，份内之事。异见争端，料必有之。国中之政府，谅非无所不能者。余所秉承不移者，唯忠信矣。倘有危难于前，必无欺瞒于世。诸君言论臧否，纵悖逆相左之议，余必当洗耳以聆。于此之外，更当恳请诸君，不吝心血，致力报效，以振吾美利坚重兴之业。余亦别无他想，唯盼吾侪协力，延继吾国既肇二百二十一年之大统，汇涓滴之力，而成万世之业。

What began 21 months ago in thedepths of winter cannot end on this
autumn night. This victory alone isnot the change we seek. It is only
the chance for us to make thatchange. And that cannot happen if we go
back to the way things were. Itcan't happen without you， without a new
spirit of service， a new spiritof sacrifice.

昔年冬日，余有志于斯，投身此业，屈指算来，倏然近二载矣。当此秋夜，追思反省，仍无溃退逃亡之意。选战之胜，无非一役之功，余梦寐所思矢志所求者，非在乎此。溯源究本，此役之胜，不过革世变时一大好良机耳。倘止步于斯，垂手而待，或无诸君倾力相援，则壮志丰功，无非泡影，诸般梦想，终必虚妄。

So let us summon a new spirit of patriotism， of responsibility，
whereeach of us resolves to pitch in and work harder and look after not
onlyourselves but each other. Let us remember that， if this
financialcrisis taught us anything， it's that we cannot have a thriving
WallStreet while Main Street suffers. In this country， we rise or fall
asone nation， as one people.

爱国之心，报国之念，吾人固有之，然逢今日之世，此心此念亦当一变——吾辈各执己业，益当各竭其力，各尽其命，非但为一己之利，而更期普世之荣。今岁，金融业界动荡多舛，细审观之，当可以之为鉴——实业之损，亦是金融之伤。可知，既在邦域之内，吾辈荣辱休戚，皆相与共矣！

Let'sresist the temptation to fall back on the same partisanship
andpettiness and immaturity that has poisoned our politics for so
long.Let's remember that it was a man from this state who first carried
thebanner of the Republican Party to the White House， a party founded
onthe values of self-reliance and individual liberty and
nationalunity.Those are values that we all share.

党争纷纭，阴谋卑鄙，愚鲁无知，皆腐蚀清白、惑乱政局之弊也，其缘由已久，余今愿与诸君协力，共灭除之。昔年曾有此郡先贤，执共和党之帜，而掌总统府之权。自强独立，自由统一等信念，皆斯人之所倡，亦吾辈之所宗。

And while the Democratic Party has won a great victory tonight， we doso
with a measure of humility and determination to heal the dividesthat
have held back our progress. As Lincoln said to a nation far moredivided
than ours， we are not enemies but friends. Though passion mayhave
strained， it must not break our bonds of affection.

今岁选战，吾民主党人幸有一胜，然谦逊和合之心未尝少减。余素信服者，乃山河破碎之际，林肯总统之言——"既是至亲，终不为敌。虽弩张剑拔，而血脉未尝断，情义不少减。"

And to those Americans whose support I have yet to earn， I may not
havewon your vote tonight， but I hear your voices. I need your help.
And Iwill be your president， too.

固然，仍有四方志士，不为鄙人所动，另有高明之选。虽终悭此一票之缘，然诸君高论，余亦声声在耳，字字在心。倘能得诸君之援手，鄙人幸甚。他日待余总而统之，亦必不另眼以待也。

And to all those watching tonight from beyond our shores，
fromparliaments and palaces， to those who are huddled around radios in
theforgotten corners of the world， our stories are singular， but
ourdestiny is shared， and a new dawn of American leadership is at
hand.
 吾邦民众，散居天下，各安其命，而其志一也。吾邦鼎盛之势，今已乍现锋芒。

To those — to those who would tear the world down： We will defeat
you.To those who seek peace and security： We support you. And to all
thosewho have wondered if America's beacon still burns as bright：
Tonight weproved once more that the true strength of our nation comes
not fromthe might of our arms or the scale of our wealth， but from the
enduringpower of our ideals： democracy， liberty， opportunity and
unyieldinghope.

至于心怀叵测，与世人为仇、与天下为敌者，吾邦猛志常在，彼等必取灭亡。心思纯良，久慕大同者，吾辈当倾力以助，鼎力相援。犹疑未定，不知吾自由之邦兴衰如何者，吾辈愿以今日盛况以告之——美利坚之所以谓之"美"者，非刀兵之强，金银之众，实民主、自由、机遇、梦想之美也！

That's the true genius of America： that America can change. Our
unioncan be perfected. What we've already achieved gives us hope for
what wecan and must achieve tomorrow.

天自有道，地自有德，恩赋吾邦无上异禀——无他，唯变而已矣。美利坚变革不怠，合众国日趋尽善。当以过往先贤之伟绩，助吾侪今日之雄心，开子孙万世之辉光。

This election had many firsts and many stories that will be told
forgenerations. But one that's on my mind tonight's about a woman who
casther ballot in Atlanta. She's a lot like the millions of others
whostood in line to make their voice heard in this election except for
onething： Ann Nixon Cooper is 106 years old.

今岁选战，多开亘古之先，屡传千秋佳话。感我至深者，亚特兰大之老妪安？尼克松？库帕也——库氏之一票，于数百万美利坚民众之选票无异，其所以引人称奇者，其人今岁高龄一百有六矣。

She was born just a generation past slavery； a time when there were
nocars on the road or planes in the sky； when someone like her
couldn'tvote for two reasons — because she was a woman and because of
the colorof her skin.

当其父辈之时，天道不彰，黑人为奴。库氏其生也不逢时，汽车尚不行于道，飞机未曾起于空，库氏既属黑人，又系女流，票选一事，概无瓜葛。

And tonight， I think about all that she's seen throughout her centuryin
America — the heartache and the hope； the struggle and the
progress；the times we were told that we can't， and the people who
pressed onwith that American creed： Yes we can.

今日今时，回溯库氏百岁之涯，但见吾邦先贤屡败屡战，且退且进，悲欣交集，甘苦杂陈。幸而正道存焉，壮志存焉，曰：吾辈既在，无所不能。

At a time when women's voices were silenced and their hopes
dismissed，she lived to see them stand up and speak out and reach for
the ballot.Yes we can.

万马齐喑，其事堪哀，吾邦女界怒而起，愤而争，苦战不歇，历数十载。幸哉库氏，以百岁之高龄，终得亲见女流自立于世，重获天赋之权——吾辈既在，无所不能！

When there was despair in the dust bowl and depression across the
land，she saw a nation conquer fear itself with a New Deal， new jobs，
a newsense of common purpose. Yes we can.

当百业萧条，国人绝望哀鸣之际，库氏亲见吾美利坚出旷世之新政，挽狂澜于既倒，扶大厦之将倾，退畏惧之势，扶奋勇之心，终至人各有位，民心乃安——吾辈既在，无所不能！

When the bombs fell on our harbor and tyranny threatened the world，
shewas there to witness a generation rise to greatness and a democracy
wassaved. Yes we can.

当吾国良港遭袭，天下桀纣当道，暴政肆虐之时，库氏亲见豪杰群起，民主不衰——吾辈既在，无所不能！

She was there for the buses in Montgomery， the hoses in Birmingham，
abridge in Selma， and a preacher from Atlanta who told a people that
"WeShall Overcome." Yes we can.

蒙哥马利公车之罢辍，伯明翰城黑人之群起，塞尔玛城血雨腥风之事，库氏般般亲历。更曾亲聆亚特兰大传教之士振臂登高之呼——"吾等必胜！"诚哉斯言！吾辈既在，无所不能！

A man touched down on the moon， a wall came down in Berlin， a world
wasconnected by our own science and imagination. And this year， in
thiselection， she touched her finger to a screen， and cast her
vote，because after 106 years in America， through the best of times and
thedarkest of hours， she knows how America can change. Yes we can.

俟科学昌明于世，创想通贯一时，既登广寒之阙，又溃柏林之墙。洋洋乎！有百年如是，乃见今岁选战中，库氏之一票。浩浩兮！一百零六载交锋更迭，方有美利坚今日之变革——吾辈既在，无所不能！

America， we have come so far. We have seen so much. But there is somuch
more to do. So tonight， let us ask ourselves — if our childrenshould
live to see the next century； if my daughters should be so luckyto live
as long as Ann Nixon Cooper， what change will they see？ Whatprogress
will we have made？

转眼兴亡过手，而今迈步从头。追昔抚今，不禁扪心而问——俟再历百年岁月，倘吾等后辈儿孙，亦有得享高寿如库氏者，复可见何等之变数？吾辈今日之功，他年可得而见之乎？

This is our chance to answer that call. This is our moment. This is
ourtime， to put our people back to work and open doors of opportunity
forour kids； to restore prosperity and promote the cause of peace；
toreclaim the American dream and reaffirm that fundamental truth，
that，out of many， we are one； that while we breathe， we hope. And
where weare met with cynicism and doubts and those who tell us that we
can't，we will respond with that timeless creed that sums up the spirit
of apeople： Yes， we can.

所谓天命时运，莫过于此——当为吾邦万民造安身立命之业，为吾辈儿孙启各显雄才之门，为寰宇各国创太平静好之世，为吾等壮志赋千秋不灭之元神。吾邦立国之本，必将光耀于天下。万千同胞，当如一人，一息尚存，梦想不灭。纵有世人旁观在侧，而疑窦生焉，吾辈亦当以千秋不易之训共答之曰——吾辈既在，无所不能！

Thank you. God bless you. And may God bless the United States of
America.
 拜谢诸君。愿天佑吾民，天佑吾邦。
