--- layout: post title: Ubuntu To Become The Official OS Of China date:
'2013-03-24T11:40:00.001+08:00' author: Wenh Q tags: modified\_time:
'2013-03-24T11:40:37.019+08:00' blogger\_id:
tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-4961947611491238191.post-5618332088792246879
blogger\_orig\_url:
http://binaryware.blogspot.com/2013/03/ubuntu-to-become-official-os-of-china.html
---

\
  

**Ubuntu To Become The Official OS Of China**

Published on [OMG!
Ubuntu!](http://www.omgubuntu.co.uk/2013/03/ubuntu-to-become-the-official-os-of-china?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+d0od+(OMG!+Ubuntu!))
| shared via [feedly](http://www.feedly.com)

[![China
Ubuntu](http://www.omgubuntu.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/China-Ubuntu.png)](http://www.omgubuntu.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/China-Ubuntu.png)

**Canonical, the makers of Ubuntu have announced that they will be
officially affiliated with the Chinese government to bring a new Ubuntu
based OS to the Chinese population.**

In a recent blog post on the [Canonical
blog](http://www.canonical.com/content/canonical-and-chinese-standards-body-announce-ubuntu-collaboration),
they went on to explain that [*Ubuntu Kylin *(the official name of the
new
OS)](http://www.omgubuntu.co.uk/2013/02/ubuntu-kylin-official-ubuntu-spin "Chinese Linux Distro Seeks Place in Ubuntu Family")
will go way beyond just a version of Ubuntu with Chinese language packs
installed. The blog post went on to say:

***"Ubuntu Kylin goes beyond language localisation and includes features
and applications that cater for the Chinese market. In the 13.04
release, Chinese input methods and Chinese calendars are supported,
there is a new weather indicator, and users can quickly search across
the most popular Chinese music services from the Dash."***

### It doesn't stop there

This isn't just a one off release, it's going to be a
completely separate version of Ubuntu that is designed specifically for
the Chinese market. Much like Kubuntu, or Xubuntu, *Ubuntu Kylin *will
have on going development separate from the core Ubuntu build. The blog
post goes on to say…

***"Future releases will include integration with Baidu maps and leading
shopping service Taobao, payment processing for Chinese banks, and
real-time train and flight information.***

***The Ubuntu Kylin team is cooperating with WPS, the most popular
office suite in China, and is creating photo editing and system
management tools which could be incorporated into other flavours of
Ubuntu worldwide***."

This is a very big move for Canonical and Ubuntu as a whole. We all know
how huge China are, and for the Chinese government to push an official
Ubuntu build onto the population can be nothing less than an amazing
bonus for the Linux world.

**What do you guys think? Is this a good move, or yet another way of the
Ubuntu development team to be spread more thinly? Tell us your thoughts
in the comments section below.**

###### *Kev Quirk is the creator of technology blog, [RefuGeeks](http://www.refugeeks.com). He is a self confessed geek, blogger & Linux advocate. You can also find Kev on [Google+](http://gplus.to/kevquirk) & [Twitter](http://twitter.com/kevquirk).*

 

[![](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?i=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:wBxX2hOkimM)](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?a=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:wBxX2hOkimM)
[![](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?d=I9og5sOYxJI)](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?a=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:I9og5sOYxJI)
[![](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?d=qj6IDK7rITs)](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?a=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:qj6IDK7rITs)
[![](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?i=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:V_sGLiPBpWU)](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?a=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:V_sGLiPBpWU)
[![](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?i=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:gIN9vFwOqvQ)](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?a=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:gIN9vFwOqvQ)
[![](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?d=yIl2AUoC8zA)](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~ff/d0od?a=VHbbVjAmacc:URYYNfREsJ0:yIl2AUoC8zA)

![](http://feeds.feedburner.com/~r/d0od/~4/VHbbVjAmacc)

\

Feedly. Feed your mind.
[http://www.feedly.com](http://www.feedly.com/#mail)
