--- 
layout: post 
title: "三维立体图片都看过，但是你看过ASCII文字版的么？" 
date:'2014-01-06T16:50:00.003+08:00' 
author: Wenh Q
tags:
modified\_time: '2014-01-06T16:50:55.591+08:00' 
blogger\_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-4961947611491238191.post-8992015644126914083
blogger\_orig\_url: http://binaryware.blogspot.com/2014/01/ascii.html
---
[三维立体图片都看过，但是你看过ASCII文字版的么？](http://initiative.yo2.cn/archives/644324)  于
09-12-12 通过 [Initiative](http://initiative.yo2.cn/)
作者：electronixtar



lude the as include the as include the as include the as include the as
include ute a right minute a right minute a right minute a right minute
a right minute wn year left down year left down year left down year left
down year left down y mpiler error compiler error compiler error
compiler error compiler error compil econd month i second month i second
month i second month i second month i secon using face her using face
her using face her using face her using face her usin they stop tart
they stop tart the stop start the stop start the stop start the it at
wasting pit at wasting pit a wasting spit a wasting spit a wasting spit
a an hast your lean hast your lean has your clean has your clean has
your clean h ead cars time lead cars time lead car time plead car time
plead car time plead i my go bottom i my go bottom i my go bottom i my
go bottom i my go bottom i m get over frogs get over frogs get over
frogs get over frog get hover frog get h n a pore old and a pore old and
a pore old and a pore old an a spore old an a s rm life rink farm life
rink farm life rink farm life rink far life drink far li server my date
server my date server my date server my date server my date serv back
ever fort back ever fort back ever fort back ever fort back ever fort
back this is filler this is filler this is filler this is filler this is
filler thi up into out of up into out of up into out of up into out of
up into out of up i l never act will never act will never act will never
act will never act will ne lly in the totally in the totally in the
totally in the totally in the totally em a look problem a look problem a
look problem a look problem a look problem a anyone is hide anyone is
hide anyone is hide anyone is hide anyone is hide anyo and distribute
and distribute and distribute and distribute and distribute and

R R - Ray Butterworth





把下面两个 R R
对对眼看到一起，你就可以从上面的[文字](http://www.lce.hut.fi/~ikalliom/stereo.txt)中看出三维立体效果了。



[ASCII
Stereograms](http://community.livejournal.com/3d_magic_eye/20339.html)非常牛逼。



如果你搜索stereogram movie或者stereogram animation，你会有更多的发现！
